README.md, before:

# alteruphono

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/tresoldi/alteruphono.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/tresoldi/alteruphono)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/tresoldi/alteruphono/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/tresoldi/alteruphono)

`alteruphono` is a Python library for applying sound changes to phonetic and
phonological representations, intended for use in simulations of language
evolution.

*Please remember that `alteruphono` is a work-in-progress.*

## Installation

In any standard Python environment, `alteruphono` can be installed with:

```
pip install alteruphono
```

The `pip` installation with also fetch dependencies, such as `pyclts`,
if necessary. Installation in virtual environments is recommended.

## How to use

Sound sequences are to be given in common
[CLDF](https://cldf.clld.org/)/[LingPy](http://lingpy.org) notation, i.e.,
as a single string with single space-separated graphemes. The library supports
different transcription systems, defaulting BIPA as defined
in [pyclts](https://pypi.org/project/pyclts/).

Sound changes are defined by simplified regular expressions. Check
the `resources/sounds_changes.tsv` for an example.

A basic usage, drawing a random sound change from the default collection
and applying it, is:

```python
import alteruphono

rules = alteruphono.utils.read_sound_changes()
random_rules = [alteruphono.utils.random_change(rules) for r in range(3)]
for rule in random_rules:
    source = rule["source"]
    target = rule["target"]
    test_case = rule["test"].split("/")[0].strip()

    print("%s -> %s" % (source, target))
    print("  [%s] [%s]" % (test_case, alteruphono.apply_rule(test_case, source, target)))
```

returning:

```
V N C -> @1[+nasalized] @3
  [a b ts a r i m b s u] [a b ts a r ĩ b s u]
e i -> a i
  [d i a z e i l e n] [d i a z a i l e n]
n k|g -> ŋ @2
  [a k a n k m i k s] [a k a ŋ k m i k s]
```

## TODO

For version 2.0:
  - Consider moving to ANTLR
  - For the grammar, consider removing direct sound match in `segment`,
    only using `alternative` (potentially renamed to `expression` and dealt
    with in an appropriate way)

Old version

  - Use `logging` everywhere
  - Implement automatic, semi-automatic, and requested syllabification
    based on prosody strength
  - Implement both PEG grammars from separate repository
  - Add support for custom replacement functions (deciding on notation)

## How to cite

If you use `alteruphono`, please cite it as:

> Tresoldi, Tiago (2019). Alteruphono, a tool for simulating sound changes.
Version 0.0.1dev. Jena. Available at: https://github.com/tresoldi/alteruphono

In BibTex:

```
@misc{Tresoldi2019alteruphono,
  author = {Tresoldi, Tiago},
  title = {Alteruphono, a tool for simulating sound changes},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/tresoldi/alteruphono}},
  address = {Jena},
  year = {2019},
}
```

## Author

Tiago Tresoldi (tresoldi@shh.mpg.de)

The author was supported during development by the 
[ERC Grant #715618](https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/206320/factsheet/en)
for the project [CALC](http://calc.digling.org)
(Computer-Assisted Language Comparison: Reconciling Computational and Classical
Approaches in Historical Linguistics), led by
[Johann-Mattis List](http://www.lingulist.de).

Commit message:

Working version of Graphviz export

README.md, after:

# alteruphono

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/tresoldi/alteruphono.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/tresoldi/alteruphono)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/tresoldi/alteruphono/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/tresoldi/alteruphono)

`alteruphono` is a Python library for applying sound changes to phonetic and
phonological representations, intended for use in simulations of language
evolution.

*Please remember that `alteruphono` is a work-in-progress.*

## Installation

In any standard Python environment, `alteruphono` can be installed with:

```
pip install alteruphono
```

The `pip` installation with also fetch dependencies, such as `pyclts`,
if necessary. Installation in virtual environments is recommended.

## How to use

Sound sequences are to be given in common
[CLDF](https://cldf.clld.org/)/[LingPy](http://lingpy.org) notation, i.e.,
as a single string with single space-separated graphemes. The library supports
different transcription systems, defaulting BIPA as defined
in [pyclts](https://pypi.org/project/pyclts/).

Sound changes are defined by simplified regular expressions. Check
the `resources/sounds_changes.tsv` for an example.

A basic usage, drawing a random sound change from the default collection
and applying it, is:

```python
import alteruphono

rules = alteruphono.utils.read_sound_changes()
random_rules = [alteruphono.utils.random_change(rules) for r in range(3)]
for rule in random_rules:
    source = rule["source"]
    target = rule["target"]
    test_case = rule["test"].split("/")[0].strip()

    print("%s -> %s" % (source, target))
    print("  [%s] [%s]" % (test_case, alteruphono.apply_rule(test_case, source, target)))
```

returning:

```
V N C -> @1[+nasalized] @3
  [a b ts a r i m b s u] [a b ts a r ĩ b s u]
e i -> a i
  [d i a z e i l e n] [d i a z a i l e n]
n k|g -> ŋ @2
  [a k a n k m i k s] [a k a ŋ k m i k s]
```

## TODO

For version 2.0:
    - Consider moving to ANTLR
    - For the grammar, consider removing direct sound match in `segment`,
      only using `alternative` (potentially renamed to `expression` and dealt
      with in an appropriate way)

    - In Graphviz output
        - Accept a strng with a description (could be the output of the
          NLAutomata)
        - Draw borders around `source`, `target`, and `context`
        - Add indices to sequences, at least optionally
        - Accept definitions of sound classes and IPA, at least in English

Old version

  - Use `logging` everywhere
  - Implement automatic, semi-automatic, and requested syllabification
    based on prosody strength
  - Implement both PEG grammars from separate repository
  - Add support for custom replacement functions (deciding on notation)

## How to cite

If you use `alteruphono`, please cite it as:

> Tresoldi, Tiago (2019). Alteruphono, a tool for simulating sound changes.
Version 0.0.1dev. Jena. Available at: https://github.com/tresoldi/alteruphono

In BibTex:

```
@misc{Tresoldi2019alteruphono,
  author = {Tresoldi, Tiago},
  title = {Alteruphono, a tool for simulating sound changes},
  howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/tresoldi/alteruphono}},
  address = {Jena},
  year = {2019},
}
```

## Author

Tiago Tresoldi (tresoldi@shh.mpg.de)

The author was supported during development by the 
[ERC Grant #715618](https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/206320/factsheet/en)
for the project [CALC](http://calc.digling.org)
(Computer-Assisted Language Comparison: Reconciling Computational and Classical
Approaches in Historical Linguistics), led by
[Johann-Mattis List](http://www.lingulist.de).
